RFC: Reference Target for Cross-root ARIA (#207)
a11y-api/a11y-api: reference-target-explainer.md

The "missing piece" to solving the cross-root ARIA problem is the ability to refer into Shadow DOM. The Reference Target feature described in this explainer intends to solve this problem in a way that is compatible with the ARIAMixin attributes.

When Reference Target is used in conjunction with ARIAMixin, it is possible to create references between elements in sibling shadow DOMs, or between any two unrelated shadow DOMs on the page, as long as the components have provided the API to do so, through reference targets and custom attributes.

### Web components as drop-in replacements for builtin elements

Web components have an increasing number of features that allow them to work and act like builtin elements. For example:

- [Form-Associated Custom Elements](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/dev/custom-elements.html#form-associated-custom-element) can participate in forms like a builtin input.
- [delegatesFocus](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ShadowRoot/delegatesFocus) allows a component to work better with keyboard navigation.

However, there are still missing pieces that prevent a web component from truly being a drop-in replacement for a built-in, including:

> 1. Can't create ID reference links to elements inside the shadow DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Can't create ID reference links to elements inside a [shadow tree](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#shadow-trees).
```

> 2. Can't use built-in attributes like `aria-label` or `role` on the host and have them apply to an element inside the shadow DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Can't use built-in attributes like `aria-label` or `role` on the host and have them apply to an element inside the shadow root.
```

> 3. Non-trivial amount of code required to hook up custom attributes on the host to ARIAMixin attributes on an element inside the shadow DOM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Non-trivial amount of code required to hook up custom attributes on the host to ARIAMixin attributes on an element inside the shadow root.
```

- Solve only the "missing piece" of cross-root ARIA: how to handle IDREF attributes referring into the shadow DOM. Avoid scope creep.
- Create a mechanism for ID reference attributes like `aria-activedescendant` and `for` to refer to an element inside a component's shadow DOM.
- Should work the same for both closed and open shadow roots.
- Shadow DOM encapsulation should be preserved: No direct access to any elements inside the shadow tree, and no implementation details leaked into a web component's API.
- Should allow creating references into multiple nested shadow roots, and across "sibling" shadow roots that don't have a direct parent/child relationship.
- The solution should be serializable, i.e. support declarative syntax that is expressible in HTML without needing JavaScript.

#### Non-Goals

- This is scoped to only solve the problem of referring _into_ the shadow DOM. It relies on ARIAMixin to refer _out_ of the shadow DOM.
- This feature does not solve the [bottleneck effect](https://alice.pages.igalia.com/blog/how-shadow-dom-and-accessibility-are-in-conflict/#limitations-of-these-apis). It is difficult to find a compelling real-world example where this is a problem.

> - This does not affect the how attributes set on the host element work. For example, this does not tackle the problem of forwarding `role` or `aria-label`, etc. from the host element to an element inside.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This does not affect how attributes set on the host element work. For example, this does not tackle the problem of forwarding `role` or `aria-label`, etc. from the host element to an element inside.
```

#### Phases

This proposal is broken into two phases:

- [Phase 1](#phase-1) adds the ability to designate a single element as the target for _all_ IDREF properties that refer to the host.
- [Phase 2](#phase-2) adds a way to re-target specific properties (like `aria-activedescendant`) to refer a separate element.

> The goal of breaking it into phases is to get the simpler and less controversial ideas working first. The solutions to Phase 2 are more complex and may need more discussion before they are ready.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of breaking it into phases is to get the simpler syntax and simpler use cases working first. The solutions to Phase 2 are more complex and may need more discussion before they are ready.
```

"Controversial" depends on who you ask :)

### <a id="phase-1"></a> Phase 1: ShadowRoot `referenceTarget` attribute

A component can specify an element in its shadow tree to act as its "reference target". When the host component is the target of a IDREF like a label's `for` attribute, the referenceTarget becomes the effective target of the label.

The shadow root specifies the ID of the target element inside the shadow DOM. This is done either in JavaScript with the `referenceTarget` attribute on the `ShadowRoot` object, or in HTML markup using the `shadowrootreferencetarget` attribute on the `<template>` element.

JavaScript example:

```html
<script>
  customElements.define(
    "fancy-input",
    class FancyInput extends HTMLElement {
      constructor() {
        super();
        this.shadowRoot_ = this.attachShadow({ mode: "closed" });

>         this.shadowRoot_.innerHTML = `<input id="real-input" />`;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        this.shadowRoot_.innerHTML = `<input id="real-input">`;
```

`<input>s` are self-closing in HTML.

        this.shadowRoot_.referenceTarget = "real-input";
      }
    }
  );
</script>

<label for="fancy-input">Fancy input</label>
<fancy-input id="fancy-input"></fancy-input>
```

Equivalent with declarative shadow DOM:

```html
<label for="fancy-input">Fancy input</label>
<fancy-input id="fancy-input">
  <template
    shadowrootmode="closed"
    shadowrootreferencetarget="real-input"
  >

>     <input id="real-input" />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <input id="real-input">
```

See above.

- fancy-listbox internally updates its mapping:
  ```js
  this.shadowRoot_.referenceTargetMap.ariaActiveDescendant = "option-2";
  ```
- **After**: `<input aria-activedescendant="fancy-listbox">` now maps to 'option-2', without needing to update the input element itself.

#### Combining `referenceTarget` and `referenceTargetMap`

In the case where both attributes are specified, `referenceTargetMap` takes priority for individual attributes, and `referenceTarget` acts as the fallback for attributes that are not specified.

In the example below, `"real-listbox"` is the target for all attributes _except_ `aria-activedescendant`, which is targeted to `"option-2"`.

```html
<input
  role="combobox"
  aria-controls="fancy-listbox"
  aria-activedescendant="fancy-listbox"
/>
<fancy-listbox id="fancy-listbox">
  <template
    shadowrootmode="open"
    shadowrootreferencetarget="real-listbox"
    shadowrootreferencetargetmap="aria-activedescendant: option-2"
  >
    <div id="real-listbox" role="listbox">
      <div id="option-1" role="option">Option 1</div>
      <div id="option-2" role="option">Option 2</div>
    </div>
  </template>
</fancy-listbox>

> ```

Reviewer 2: This is very powerful. This would support both the usecase where 1) the component author wants to explicitly limit the `aria-*` attributes that can be used to target specific elements, as well as 2) the case where the component author doesn't care and wants to just have any wildcard `aria-*` attribute point at a specific element. It also does so in such a way that doesn't force usecase #<span></span>2 down the explicit path if they need to set aside one `aria-*` attribute for a particular target (as in your `aria-activedescendant` example). I like it!

        this.shadowRoot_.innerHTML = `<input id="real-input" />`;
        this.shadowRoot_.referenceTarget = "real-input";
      }
    }
  );
</script>

<!-- ❌ This label isn't associated with anything because it doesn't use `for`, 
     and fancy-input is not form-associated. -->
<label>
  Fancy Input
  <fancy-input></fancy-input>
</label>

<!-- ✅ This label is applied to the inner `<input id="real-input" />`, which is 
     fancy-input's referenceTarget. -->
<label for="fancy-input">
  Fancy Input
  <fancy-input id="fancy-input"></fancy-input>
</label>
```

#### Nesting inside `<form>`

Reference target does not change the behavior of the host element when it is nested inside a form. It does _not_ implicitly associate the target element with the form if it is not a form-associated custom element.

#### JavaScript attributes that reflect `Element` objects

Some JavaScript attributes reflect HTML attributes as Element objects rather than ID strings. These include:

- ARIAMixin attributes like `ariaActiveDescendantElement`
- `HTMLButtonElement.popoverTargetElement`
- `HTMLInputElement.form`
- `HTMLInputElement.labels`
- `HTMLLabelElement.control`
- _(This list is not exhaustive)_

> These will _always_ refer to the **host** element that they're targeting, and _never_ the referenceTarget element directly. This behavior maintains the design that an [IDL attribute with type Element](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/common-dom-interfaces.html#reflecting-content-attributes-in-idl-attributes:element) can only refer to an element that is a descendant of a [shadow-including ancestor](https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-shadow-including-ancestor) of the element hosting the attribute.

Reviewer 2: I like this. It exposes the minimal API surface while also (potentially) allowing authors with full access to open shadow roots to traverse the DOM and build the equivalent of `composedPath`/`activeElement`-drilling/etc.

#### Cons

- Requires new attributes in two places in order to work: E.g. `shadowrootreflectscontrols` on the shadow root _and_ `reflectariacontrols` on the target element.
- When multiple elements are used for the same attribute, the author cannot control the order (the order is always the DOM order).

### Use exported IDs instead of per-attribute targeting

The [ExportID explainer](https://github.com/WICG/aom/blob/gh-pages/exportid-explainer.md) proposes a way to refer to elements inside the shadow DOM by name. For example, `"fancy-input::id(real-input)"` to refer to a specific `<input>` element inside a `<fancy-input>`.

It would be possible to use exported IDs instead of `referenceTargetMap` if/when it is necessary to refer to an element other than the primary reference target.

#### Pros

- Does not suffer from the [bottleneck effect](https://alice.pages.igalia.com/blog/how-shadow-dom-and-accessibility-are-in-conflict/#limitations-of-these-apis).
- Potentially less confusing why you reference the _container_ listbox with `aria-activedescendant` instead of the element itself.

#### Cons

> - Exposes some of the internal details of a control and does not give a way for the control to encapsulate those details.

Reviewer: I'm still not really clear on how this is the case any more than it is for `::part()`.

Author: I added a sub-bullet to this con to capture the feedback:
>   * This may not be a dealbreaker: the [`::part()`](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-shadow-parts/#part) CSS selector also has a similar drawback for CSS styles, but it still is a standard and a useful feature for styles.

- Using a custom prop to control the target of `referenceTargetMap`.
  - `<fancy-listbox>` allows the target of its `aria-activedescendant` to be controlled externally via its custom `activeitem` attribute.

#### `<fancy-input>`

This component is a wrapper around an `<input>`, similar to the one in the examples above with a few additional features.

1. It sets the input as the reference target. This lets, for example, a label for this component to be applied to the input.
2. A custom attribute `listbox` is hooked up to both `ariaControlsElements` and `ariaActiveDescendantElement`.
   - The listbox targets the two attributes to different elements inside (see `<fancy-listbox>` below), but this component references the parent listbox for both.
3. It observes the `role` attribute to set the `role` of the internal input.

```js
customElements.define(
  "fancy-input",
  class FancyInput extends HTMLElement {
    static observedAttributes = ["role", "listbox"];

    constructor() {
      super();
      this.shadowRoot_ = this.attachShadow({ mode: "closed" });

>       this.shadowRoot_.innerHTML = `<input id="real-input" />`;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      this.shadowRoot_.innerHTML = `<input id="real-input">`;
```

See above.
